MergingSnapshotProducer (#2620)
apache/iceberg-rust: docs/rfcs/conflict-detection.md

Reviewer: Rename file 0003_conflict_detection.md?

I think this is a worthwhile RFC to commit to the repo.

    }
}

impl DeleteAwareOperation for RowDelta {
    async fn validate(&self, base: &Table, parent: Option<i64>) -> Result<()> {
        // composes the default helpers, e.g.
        self.validate_no_new_deletes_for_data_files(base, parent, None, &self.targets)
            .await
    }
    fn data_filter(&mut self) -> &mut ManifestFilterManager { &mut self.data_filter }
    fn delete_filter(&mut self) -> &mut ManifestFilterManager { &mut self.delete_filter }
}
```

Because the operation is rebuilt each commit attempt, the managers are reconstructed
deterministically per attempt from the action's stored inputs — no stale per-attempt state.

### 4.2 `ManifestFilterManager` (new struct)

A concrete struct (not a trait) that an operation owns — one for data manifests, one for
delete manifests. It accumulates which files/entries to drop and rewrites the affected
manifests during manifest production. Its only durable state is within a single filtering
pass, which matches the operation's per-attempt lifetime.

```rust
// NEW — concrete struct
struct ManifestFilterManager {
    // files/entries to drop, drop predicate, within-pass tracking, ...
}

> impl ManifestFilterManager {

Author: This is a placeholder for now, we will need to add more concrete methods

        for f in files {
            match f.content_type() {
                DataContentType::Data => self.deleted_data_files.push(f),
                DataContentType::PositionDeletes | DataContentType::EqualityDeletes => {
                    self.deleted_delete_files.push(f)
                }
            }
        }
        Ok(self)
    }

    pub fn set_starting_snapshot_id(mut self, id: i64) -> Self { /* ... */ self }
    pub fn set_data_sequence_number(mut self, seq: i64) -> Self { /* ... */ self }
    // set_commit_uuid / set_key_metadata / set_snapshot_properties omitted

    /// Rebuild a fresh operation per attempt; the managers are repopulated
    /// deterministically from the action's stored inputs (survives do_commit retries).
    fn build_operation(&self) -> RewriteFilesOperation {
        let mut op = RewriteFilesOperation {
            deleted_data_files: self.deleted_data_files.clone(),
            deleted_delete_files: self.deleted_delete_files.clone(),
            starting_snapshot_id: self.starting_snapshot_id,
            data_sequence_number: self.data_sequence_number,

>             data_filter: ManifestFilterManager::default(),

Author: I don't think this will be enough, the actual filter manager implementation will need to have file io and related states

  under the License.
-->

# Design Document: Snapshot Conflict Validation

## 1. Problem Statement

Snapshot production on `main` only supports append-only operations. There is no
machinery for the operations that **remove existing files** from a table — delete,
overwrite, and rewrite. Those operations need two capabilities that append does not:

1. **Write-time conflict validation** — before writing a new snapshot, the commit must
   check the refreshed base table for concurrent changes that would make the pending
   operation incorrect (e.g. a concurrent commit that added delete files for data files
   this operation is about to rewrite).
2. **Manifest filtering** — instead of carrying existing manifests forward verbatim, a
   delete-class operation must rewrite manifests to drop the files it removes.

iceberg-java packages all of this into a single `MergingSnapshotProducer` base class via
implementation inheritance. Rust has no implementation inheritance, and the append path is
already factored differently. We need a shape that adds validation + filtering for
delete-class operations **without disturbing the append-only path** and without recreating

> a Java-style inheritance chain.

Reviewer: What do you think we should strive for? To align closely to the iceberg-java structure, or to well-define the requirements and strive for something idiomatic?

Reviewer: My vote would be for the latter, although I think a reference to equivalent Java structures can be helpful. i.e. implementation of this trait is equivalent to X class in Java.

Author: Yes, I want it to be as rust idiomatic as possible. A mapping to explain which traits/struct in rust functions as X class in java makes sense to me

> a Java-style inheritance chain.

Reviewer: I don't mind disturbing the append-only path if it results in a better API long-term.

This document defines the trait/struct structure for that shape. Concrete operations
(`OverwriteFiles`, `RowDelta`, `RewriteFiles`) and the `DeleteFileIndex` conflict-scoping

> gap are out of scope here and left as placeholders.

Reviewer: I found this a bit confusing. How's this?

```suggestion
This document defines the trait/struct structure for that shape.
Concrete operations (`OverwriteFiles`, `RowDelta`, `RewriteFiles`) as well as in-depth delete file conflict resolution (`DeleteFileIndex`) are out of scope here and left as placeholders.
```

- `validate` is invoked by the **action** before it hands off to `SnapshotProducer::commit`,
  so validation precedes every write. The producer stays oblivious to validation.
- The producer drives the operation by `&mut` so the filter managers can mutate during
  manifest production. This is the one base-trait signature change: `existing_manifest`
  takes `&mut self`; `FastAppendOperation` absorbs it trivially.

## 4. Proposed Components

### 4.1 `DeleteAwareOperation` (new trait)

A sub-trait of `SnapshotProduceOperation`, implemented only by delete-class operations. It
provides three things:

- **`validate`** — the per-operation conflict check (real polymorphism; each operation
  implements its own).
- **Reusable validation helpers with default implementations** — `validation_history` and
  `validate_no_new_deletes_for_data_files`. A single `validate()` is not enough: each
  delete-class operation composes the same lower-level checks (scan the snapshots added since
  the validation window, find conflicting deletes for a set of data files). Putting these on
  the trait as defaults lets each `validate` reuse them instead of re-deriving the logic.

>   (See `#2590` for the reference shape of these helpers.)

Reviewer: Should this actually be moved out to a separate struct? It sounds to me so far that these only have one implementation, and I'd prefer the API of the trait be simpler so that the responsibilities of operation implementations are clear.

- **Filter accessors** — `data_filter` / `delete_filter` reach the operation's owned filter

>   managers so the above can be wired without each implementor re-plumbing them.

Reviewer: Is the re-plumbing really so bad?

Again, motivation is to keep traits simple.

    delete_filter: ManifestFilterManager,
    // ... added files, conflict-detection config, etc.
}

impl RowDelta {
    fn remove_rows(&mut self, file: DataFile) {
        self.delete_filter().delete_file(file);
    }
}

impl DeleteAwareOperation for RowDelta {
    async fn validate(&self, base: &Table, parent: Option<i64>) -> Result<()> {
        // composes the default helpers, e.g.
        self.validate_no_new_deletes_for_data_files(base, parent, None, &self.targets)
            .await
    }
    fn data_filter(&mut self) -> &mut ManifestFilterManager { &mut self.data_filter }
    fn delete_filter(&mut self) -> &mut ManifestFilterManager { &mut self.delete_filter }
}
```

Because the operation is rebuilt each commit attempt, the managers are reconstructed
deterministically per attempt from the action's stored inputs — no stale per-attempt state.

### 4.2 `ManifestFilterManager` (new struct)

A concrete struct (not a trait) that an operation owns — one for data manifests, one for
delete manifests. It accumulates which files/entries to drop and rewrites the affected
manifests during manifest production. Its only durable state is within a single filtering

> pass, which matches the operation's per-attempt lifetime.

Reviewer: How do we believe this should interact with `trait ManifestProcess`? I see that `SnapshotProduceOperation::existing_manifest` already uses it, but I'm wondering if there's a better way to factor this. Don't have an opinion right now.
